
The default interactive shell is now zsh.
To update your account to use zsh, please run `chsh -s /bin/zsh`.
dhcp-10-29-45-156:document_summarizer patricktimons$ source /Users/patricktimons/Documents/GitHub/document_summarizer/.venv/bin/activate
(.venv) dhcp-10-29-45-156:document_summarizer patricktimons$ /Users/patricktimons/Documents/GitHub/document_summarizer/.venv/bin/python /Users/patricktimons/Documents/GitHub/document_summarizer/summarization/summarize.py
"Nineteen Eighty-Four" by George Orwell is a Project Gutenberg of Australia eBook, created from printed editions in the public domain in Australia. The novel is set in a dystopian society where the protagonist, Winston Smith, struggles with the oppressive regime led by Big Brother. The story begins on a cold April day as Winston enters his apartment building, Victory Mansions, and is confronted by a poster of Big Brother with the caption "BIG BROTHER IS WATCHING YOU." The novel explores themes of totalitarianism, surveillance, and the power of language. In the midst of the Two Minutes Hate, Winston experiences a range of emotions, from fear and anger towards Goldstein to a brief moment of sympathy for the heretic. He even finds himself momentarily hating Big Brother and the Party, but this quickly turns into adoration. After the Hate, Winston returns to his diary and writes "DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER" multiple times, panicking when he realizes what he's done. He is interrupted by a knock at the door, revealing Mrs. Parsons, who asks for help with her blocked sink. While in her flat, Winston is confronted by her children, who are dressed as Spies and accuse him of being a traitor and thought-criminal. Winston reflects on the past and the concept of doublethink, the act of holding two contradictory beliefs simultaneously. He struggles to remember when he first heard of Big Brother and the Party, as their history has been altered and destroyed. He recalls a time when he held proof of the falsification of historical facts, but such evidence is rare and difficult to find. As he contemplates these thoughts, he is interrupted by the instructress on the telescreen during his morning exercises. Winston's body remains inscrutable as he watches the instructress during a fitness session, knowing that a single flicker of the eyes could give him away. Later, at work, he deals with routine messages and focuses on his main job of the morning, which involves altering and rectifying documents to align with the Party's narrative. Winston is good at this kind of work and takes pleasure in it, even though it often involves fabricating information. He creates a fictional character, Comrade Ogilvy, to be commemorated in Big Brother's Order for the Day, and feels a sense of satisfaction as he completes the task. Meanwhile, in the canteen, Winston is approached by his friend Syme, who asks if he has any razor blades, as there has been a shortage for months. In the crowded canteen, Winston and Syme discuss the progress of the Newspeak dictionary and the destruction of words. Syme passionately explains how the aim of Newspeak is to narrow the range of thought, making thoughtcrime impossible. Winston believes that Syme will eventually be vaporized due to his intelligence and lack of discretion. They are interrupted by Parsons, who talks about his children's enthusiasm for the Party and their activities in the Spies. The telescreen announces an increase in production and a rise in the standard of living, causing Winston to reflect on the miserable conditions they live in and wonder if things had always been this way. In Airstrip One, the majority of people are small, dark, and ill-favored, with the beetle-like type flourishing best under the Party's dominion. Winston contemplates who would survive and who would perish under the Party's rule, realizing that the proles, the disregarded masses, hold the power to destroy the Party if they could become conscious of their own strength. The Party keeps the proles in control by allowing them to follow their ancestral code, with promiscuity going unpunished and divorce permitted. Winston struggles with his own sexual desires, remembering his wife Katharine and their loveless marriage, as well as a disappointing encounter with a prostitute. He concludes that the sexual act, successfully performed, is rebellion and desire is thoughtcrime. In a world of terrible poverty, a few rich men called capitalists lived in beautiful houses with many servants. They owned everything and everyone else was their slave. The Party claimed that people were better off now than before the Revolution, but Winston wondered how much of it was lies. He found concrete evidence that the confessions of three men accused of crimes were lies, but he could not prove it. The Party controlled the past and the external world, making it difficult to know the truth. Winston believed that if freedom to say that two plus two make four was granted, all else would follow. He found himself in a poor neighborhood, where the sight of a Party member was uncommon and potentially dangerous. As he walked, a rocket bomb exploded nearby, causing destruction and chaos. In the streets of London, Winston encounters an old man who lived before the Revolution and questions him about life before the Party. The old man's memory is filled with useless details, and Winston realizes that the claim of the Party to have improved the conditions of human life cannot be tested, as there is no standard against which it can be compared. Winston finds himself outside the junk-shop where he had bought his diary and enters, where he buys a beautiful piece of coral embedded in glass. Winston finds a beautiful glass paperweight in an old shop and is drawn to it because of its apparent uselessness and the fact that it belonged to a different age. The shopkeeper, Mr. Charrington, shows him a room upstairs that looks like it was meant to be lived in, with no telescreen. Winston feels a sense of nostalgia and briefly considers renting the room, but dismisses the idea. As he leaves the shop, he encounters the dark-haired girl from the Fiction Department, who he believes is spying on him. He becomes increasingly paranoid and fearful, contemplating suicide as a way to escape the Thought Police. Later, the girl slips a note into his hand that reads "I love you," causing Winston to feel a mix of hope and fear. Winston works on a production report, successfully shutting the girl out of his mind for two hours. He attends the Community Centre, plays table tennis, and listens to a lecture on Ingsoc. He thinks about how to get in touch with the girl and arrange a meeting, eventually deciding that the canteen is the safest place. Over the next week, they struggle to find a moment to speak to each other, but eventually manage to exchange a few words in the canteen. They agree to meet at Victory Square, and Winston arrives early, picking bluebells while he waits. The girl appears, and they make their way to a secluded spot in the woods. Winston reveals his age, marital status, and physical ailments, but the girl, Julia, doesn't care. They embrace and kiss, but Winston feels no physical desire. Winston and Julia discuss their pasts and their hatred for the Party. Julia reveals that she has had numerous affairs with Party members, which Winston finds thrilling as it hints at possible corruption within the Party. They continue to meet in secret, but their encounters are often brief and risky due to the constant surveillance. Julia is adept at evading the Party's rules and staying alive, but she does not believe in organized revolt. They do not discuss the possibility of marriage, as it is too remote and unlikely to be sanctioned by the Party. In the novel, Julia and Winston discuss the Party's sexual puritanism and how it induces hysteria, which can be transformed into war-fever and leader-worship. They also talk about the family's role as an extension of the Thought Police. Later, they rent a room above Mr. Charrington's shop, knowing it is a dangerous move that could lead to their capture. Julia brings real sugar, bread, jam, milk, and coffee, all Inner Party items, to the room, and they enjoy a brief moment of peace and intimacy before being reminded of the ever-present danger of rats. Winston and Julia continue to meet in the room above Mr. Charrington's shop, finding solace and temporary safety in their secret hideaway. They discuss the possibility of joining the Brotherhood, but have no idea how to go about it. Julia is more skeptical about the Party's propaganda and believes the war is a sham, but she is not interested in the larger implications of the Party's control over history and reality. Winston tries to explain the importance of preserving the past and resisting the Party's manipulation, but Julia remains focused on their present relationship and personal rebellion. Despite their differing perspectives, they continue to find comfort and hope in each other's company. Winston and Julia find themselves in O'Brien's luxurious dwelling, feeling intimidated by the unfamiliar atmosphere of the Inner Party's living quarters. They are amazed by the richness and spaciousness of everything, as well as the unfamiliar smells of good food and tobacco. Despite their fear of being caught, they are admitted without any issues by O'Brien's servant. As they enter, they find O'Brien studying a slip of paper, his heavy face looking both formidable and intelligent. They had done it, they had finally made contact with the conspiracy they had been dreaming of, but they are also aware of the danger they are putting themselves in by being there. Winston, exhausted from working over ninety hours in five days, carries a heavy briefcase containing Goldstein's book, which he has not yet opened. He recalls the sudden announcement during Hate Week that Oceania was at war with Eastasia, not Eurasia, and how the crowd's hatred shifted immediately without any acknowledgment of the change. In the midst of a speech detailing atrocities, massacres, and other horrors, the speaker suddenly changes the names of the countries involved, revealing that Oceania is now at war with Eastasia. This causes a commotion as the crowd realizes that the banners and posters around them are incorrect, and they quickly tear them down, blaming the agents of Goldstein for the sabotage. Meanwhile, the war continues, with the primary aim of modern warfare being to use up the products of the machine without raising the general standard of living. This is achieved through continuous warfare, which destroys the products of human labor and keeps the population in a state of scarcity and hardship, maintaining the hierarchical society. The war is never meant to be decisive, as the three super-states are too evenly matched and have no material cause for fighting. The war serves to maintain the status quo and keep the masses under control. In Oceania, scientific research is focused on war and police espionage, with the two main goals of the Party being to conquer the entire earth and extinguish independent thought. The search for new weapons is continuous, and the three super-states are constantly working on projects to gain an advantage over one another. However, none of these projects ever come to fruition, and the super-states never gain a significant lead on the others. Despite possessing atomic bombs, the super-states never use them, as they believe a decisive opportunity will come sooner or later. The art of war has remained mostly stagnant, with the main frontiers never being crossed except by bombs. The conditions of life in all three super-states are very similar, and their social systems are indistinguishable. The war is waged by each ruling group against its own subjects, with the aim of keeping the structure of society intact. The concept of human brotherhood is assailed by those who hope to be in positions of command, and the new movements that arise in the mid-century have the conscious aim of perpetuating unfreedom and inequality. Ingsoc and its rivals emerged as fully worked-out political theories after a decade of national wars, civil wars, revolutions, and counter-revolutions. The new aristocracy, made up of bureaucrats, scientists, technicians, and other professionals, was shaped by the world of monopoly industry and centralized government. With the development of television and the ability to receive and transmit simultaneously on the same instrument, private life came to an end, and the possibility of enforcing complete obedience and uniformity of opinion on all subjects now existed for the first time. The Party, in full control of all records and the minds of its members, ensures that the past is whatever it chooses to make it. The essence of oligarchical rule is the persistence of a certain world-view and way of life, imposed by the dead upon the living. The Party is not concerned with perpetuating its blood but with perpetuating itself. The beliefs, habits, tastes, emotions, and mental attitudes that characterize the time are designed to sustain the mystique of the Party and prevent the true nature of present-day society from being perceived. The alteration of the past is necessary to safeguard the infallibility of the Party and to ensure that all written records agree with the orthodoxy of the moment. The Party's secret of rulership is to combine a belief in one's own infallibility with the power to learn from past mistakes. Winston is in a high-ceilinged, windowless cell with walls of white porcelain and concealed lamps flooding it with cold light. He is hungry and in pain, and wonders how long it has been since he was arrested. He recalls being taken to a temporary lock-up used by the patrols, where he observed the difference in demeanor between Party prisoners and ordinary criminals. The ordinary criminals seemed to care nothing for anybody, while the Party prisoners were always silent and terrified. Winston is unsure of how long he has been in his current cell, but he has learned to sit still and not make any sudden movements. He is eventually joined by Mr. Charrington, who has undergone a transformation and is revealed to be a member of the Thought Police. Winston is imprisoned in the Ministry of Love, where he is subjected to brutal torture and interrogation. He is starved, beaten, and left alone for hours, constantly fearing the next blow. He thinks of O'Brien and the razor blade, hoping for a chance to end his suffering. Various prisoners come and go, including Ampleforth, Parsons, and a man who is dying of starvation. Winston is shocked when O'Brien enters the cell, revealing himself as a loyal Party member. The torture continues, and Winston realizes that in the face of pain, there are no heroes. Winston endures continuous beatings and interrogations, sometimes confessing to crimes he didn't commit just to make the pain stop. The beatings become less frequent, and his questioners change tactics, using humiliation and relentless questioning to break him down. O'Brien, who Winston believes is directing everything, appears to him in various memories and dreams, promising to save him and make him perfect. Eventually, Winston finds himself in a room with O'Brien, who uses a dial to inflict pain on him while questioning him about the past and the nature of reality. Despite the pain, Winston struggles to hold onto his memories and beliefs, but O'Brien insists that reality exists only in the mind of the Party and that Winston must submit to their version of the truth in order to become sane. Winston is told that the Party does not seek power for the good of others, but solely for its own sake. O'Brien explains that power is collective and that the individual only has power in so far as they cease to be an individual. He emphasizes that power is power over human beings, especially over the mind, and that reality is inside the skull. Winston struggles to understand the Party's motives and the concept of power, but O'Brien insists that they are not interested in the overt act, but rather in the thought. He reveals that the Party does not merely destroy its enemies, but changes them, converting and reshaping their minds before killing them. Winston is told by O'Brien that they have the power to do anything, including conquering Eurasia and Eastasia, and that they make the laws of nature. Winston argues that their world is impossible to create, as it is based on fear, hatred, and cruelty. O'Brien insists that they control life at all levels and that humanity is the Party. Winston believes that something in the universe will eventually defeat the Party, but O'Brien remains confident in their power. As Winston's physical condition deteriorates, he is given better living conditions and begins to regain his strength. He starts to re-educate himself, accepting that he had been ready to capitulate long before he had taken the decision. Winston, after years of being watched by the Thought Police, finally accepts the Party's beliefs and surrenders to them. He is imprisoned and tortured, but his true breaking point comes when he is faced with his worst fear: rats. In a moment of desperation, he betrays Julia by begging for the rats to be put on her instead. After his release, he is a changed man, having grown fatter and more coarse in appearance. He spends his days in the Chestnut Tree cafe, drinking Victory Gin and listening to the telescreen for news about the war. The gin, which he finds disgusting, is inextricably linked in his mind with the smell of the rats that had once haunted him. In the Chestnut Tree Cafe, Winston enjoys his life of drinking gin and playing chess, even though the gin tastes horrible. He has a job, a sinecure, and is paid well. One day, he meets Julia in the park, and they discuss how they betrayed each other. They agree to meet again, but Winston loses interest and returns to the cafe. Later, a trumpet call announces a victory in the war, and Winston feels a sense of triumph. He gazes at Big Brother's portrait, finally understanding and accepting the Party's control over him. He has won the victory over himself and now loves Big Brother. In Newspeak, the language of George Orwell's 1984, adjectives were formed by adding the suffix -FUL to the noun-verb, and adverbs by adding -WISE. The vocabulary was tiny, and new ways of reducing it were constantly being devised. Newspeak differed from most other languages in that its vocabulary grew smaller instead of larger every year. The intention was to make speech, and especially speech on any subject not ideologically neutral, as nearly as possible independent of consciousness. The words of the B vocabulary even gained in force from the fact that nearly all of them were very much alike, encouraging a gabbling style of speech, at once staccato and monotonous. In Newspeak, a language from George Orwell's 1984, words and phrases were often abbreviated to save time and subtly alter their meanings. This practice was most common in totalitarian countries and organizations. The goal was to make speech, especially on ideologically charged subjects, as independent of consciousness as possible. The Newspeak vocabulary was small and constantly shrinking, making it difficult to express unorthodox opinions. When Oldspeak was eventually replaced by Newspeak, the last link to the past would be severed, and pre-revolutionary literature would become unintelligible and untranslatable.                         
(.venv) dhcp-10-29-45-156:document_summarizer patricktimons$ /Users/patricktimons/Documents/GitHub/document_summarizer/.venv/bin/python /Users/patricktimons/Documents/GitHub/document_summarizer/summarization/summarize.py
The Lord of the Rings, written by J.R.R. Tolkien, is a tale about the Great War of the Ring and includes glimpses of ancient history. The story is primarily concerned with Hobbits, a small and ancient people who love peace, quiet, and well-farmed countryside. They are skilled with tools but do not understand or like machines. Hobbits are quick of hearing and sharp-eyed, and they possess the art of disappearing swiftly and silently when they do not wish to be seen. The story follows the adventures of Bilbo Baggins and his heir, Frodo, as they become involved in the events of the Third Age of Middle-earth. In the early days, Hobbits began to settle in ordered communities, with Bree and Chetwood being one of the first important settlements. They learned their letters and began to write after the manner of the Dúnedain, who had learned the art from the Elves. The Hobbits spoke the Common Speech, the Westron, and kept a few words of their own, as well as their own names of months and days. The Shire was divided into four quarters, the Farthings, and was hardly governed, with families managing their own affairs. The only real official in the Shire was the Mayor of Michel Delving, who was elected every seven years. The Hobbits had a peculiar custom of smoking pipe-weed, which was first grown by Tobold Hornblower in the Southfarthing. The art of smoking spread among Dwarves and other folk through the ancient road-meeting at the old inn of Bree, The Prancing Pony. The Hobbits lived in holes in the ground, or smials, and built farmhouses and barns, a craft possibly derived from the Dúnedain or the Elves. Bilbo Baggins, a peculiar and wealthy hobbit, adopts his young cousin Frodo and brings him to live at Bag End. As Bilbo's eleventy-first birthday approaches, rumors circulate about the extravagant party he is planning. Bilbo's mysterious past and seemingly perpetual youth intrigue the other hobbits, who believe his home is filled with treasure. Gandalf the Wizard arrives with fireworks for the celebration, further fueling the excitement. Meanwhile, Bilbo possesses a magical ring that he found during his adventures, which he keeps secret from everyone except Gandalf and Frodo. Bilbo Baggins, who is very fond of his garden and the Shire, decides to go on a holiday and has a plan in mind. He throws a party for his eleventy-first birthday, inviting practically everyone living nearby, as well as some from other parts of the Shire and even a few from outside the borders. The party is filled with food, drink, music, games, and fireworks designed and made by Gandalf. During his speech, Bilbo announces that he is leaving and vanishes using his magic ring. The guests are shocked and offended, but most assume it's just a prank. Bilbo returns to his home, changes into old clothes, and prepares to leave for his long holiday. He entrusts everything to his nephew Frodo, including the ring, which he hesitates to part with. Gandalf encourages him to leave it behind, as he believes Bilbo has had it long enough and won't need it anymore. Bilbo Baggins becomes angry when Gandalf suggests he should give up the ring he found, insisting it is his own and he will keep it. Gandalf warns him that the ring has too much hold on him and he should let it go to be free. Eventually, Bilbo agrees to give the ring to Frodo, and Gandalf advises Frodo not to use it and to keep it secret and safe. Gandalf then leaves, saying he may be away for a while but will return when he can. The disappearance of Bilbo Baggins is discussed throughout the Shire, and he becomes a legendary figure in hobbit folklore. Meanwhile, Frodo settles down, but the growth of hobbit-sense is not very noticeable, and he continues to carry on Bilbo's tradition of giving lavish birthday parties. Frodo continued to celebrate Bilbo's birthday every year, and people began to notice that he, too, showed signs of good preservation. He often wandered alone and was sometimes seen far from home walking under the starlight. Rumors of strange things happening in the world outside reached the Shire, and Frodo gathered all the news he could. Elves were leaving Middle-earth, and there were whispers of the Enemy and the Land of Mordor. Gandalf reappeared after a long absence and revealed to Frodo that the ring he possessed was the One Ring to rule them all, created by the Dark Lord in Mordor. The ring had a dangerous power that would eventually overcome anyone who possessed it, and it was crucial that the Dark Lord not regain it. Gandalf tells Frodo the long and dark history of the One Ring, explaining how it has passed through the hands of various beings, including Sauron, Isildur, and Gollum. He reveals that Gollum was once a hobbit-like creature named Sméagol who murdered his friend Déagol to obtain the Ring, which eventually corrupted him into the wretched creature he became. Gandalf also shares that he and Aragorn, a great traveler and huntsman, had searched for Gollum for years before finally capturing him. Gollum's trail led them to Mordor, where the Dark Power was gathering all wicked things. The Ring, which had once been lost, was now actively seeking to return to its master, Sauron, who had regained his strength and was seeking to conquer all the lands in darkness once more. Gandalf advises Frodo to leave the Shire soon and quietly, suggesting he make for Rivendell. Frodo agrees to go east and take Sam with him to visit the Elves. News reaches the Ivy Bush and Green Dragon that Frodo is selling Bag End to the Sackville-Bagginses, and rumors circulate about his reasons for leaving. With Merry's help, Frodo buys a small house in Crickhollow, Buckland, and pretends he will settle there permanently. Gandalf stays in the Shire for over two months before announcing he must leave to investigate some news that has made him anxious. He warns Frodo once more not to use the Ring and promises to return if necessary. Frodo becomes anxious as Gandalf still hasn't arrived, but he and his friends continue to prepare for their journey. They pack their belongings and send them off to Buckland, and Frodo decides to walk there himself. Along the way, they encounter the Sackville-Bagginses, who are eager to take over Bag End. After a final meal at Bag End, Frodo, Pippin, and Sam set off on their journey. They walk through the Shire, eventually stopping to rest and sleep under a tree. The next day, they continue their journey, but encounter a mysterious black rider who seems to be searching for Frodo. They manage to avoid detection and continue on their way, wondering who the rider is and where he came from. Frodo, Sam, and Pippin encounter Gildor Inglorion and a group of Elves, who invite the hobbits to join them for the night. They discuss the Black Riders and the dangers that lie ahead, with Gildor advising Frodo to continue his journey to Rivendell and not to wait for Gandalf. He also suggests that Frodo should not go alone and take trustworthy friends with him. The hobbits enjoy the Elves' company, food, and song before continuing their journey. Frodo and his companions encounter Gildor, an Elf who warns them about the Black Riders and advises them to avoid the roads. They continue their journey, eventually reaching Farmer Maggot's land. Despite Frodo's fear of the farmer and his dogs due to past encounters, Pippin reassures him that Maggot is a friend. They accept Maggot's invitation to come inside for a drink and conversation. Maggot mentions an outlandish stranger asking strange questions, which raises their concern about the Black Riders. Frodo and his companions get lost in the woods and accidentally trespass on Farmer Maggot's land. The farmer recognizes Frodo's name and tells them about a mysterious black rider who had come looking for Baggins earlier. They accept Maggot's invitation to supper and he offers to drive them to the Ferry. On their way, they hear hoofs on the road ahead and hide, but it turns out to be Merry Brandybuck, who has been searching for them. They reach Frodo's new house at Crickhollow, where Merry and Fatty Bolger have made it look like home. They enjoy a bath and supper before discussing their next move. Frodo decides to leave for the Old Forest the next day, despite the danger and the fact that Gandalf has not yet arrived. Merry has already prepared everything for their journey, including six ponies and supplies. They agree that Fatty Bolger will stay behind to maintain the pretense that Frodo is still living at Crickhollow and to inform Gandalf of their departure when he arrives. The hobbits set off early in the morning, riding through the mist and eventually reaching the edge of the Old Forest. In the Forest, the hobbits find a wide bare space where a fire had burned the ground. Merry mentions that there are various strange creatures living deep in the Forest, and that paths seem to shift and change in a peculiar manner. As they continue through the Forest, they feel as if they are being watched with disapproval and enmity. They eventually find themselves near the River Withywindle, where they encounter a huge willow tree that seems to have a malevolent presence. The tree traps Pippin and Merry, and Frodo and Sam attempt to rescue them by starting a fire, but this only angers the tree further. Desperate for help, Frodo hears a deep, glad voice singing nonsense words in the distance. Half hopeful and half afraid, Frodo and Sam stand still, unsure of what new danger or help may be approaching. Frodo and Sam, enchanted by a mysterious voice, encounter Tom Bombadil, a seemingly magical man who rescues Merry and Pippin from the clutches of Old Man Willow. They are then welcomed into Tom's home, where they meet his wife, Goldberry, the River-daughter. The hobbits enjoy a long and merry meal, and after a night of strange dreams, they wake up refreshed in the morning light. noses: these things are, perhaps, enough to explain what happened. However, that may be: they woke suddenly and uncomfortably from a sleep they had never meant to take. The standing stone was cold, and it cast a long pale shadow that stretched eastward over them. The sun, a pale and watery yellow, was gleaming through the mist just above the west wall of the hollow in which they lay; north, south, and east, beyond the wall the fog was thick, cold and white. The air was silent, heavy and chill. Their ponies were standing crowded together with their heads down.

The hobbits sprang to their feet in alarm, and ran to the western rim. They found that they were upon an island in the fog. Even as they looked out in dismay towards the setting sun, it sank before their eyes into a white sea, and a cold grey shadow sprang up in the East behind. The fog rolled up to the walls and rose above them, and as it mounted it bent over their heads until it became a roof: they were shut in a hall of mist whose central pillar was the standing stone.

They felt as if a trap was closing about them; but they did not quite lose heart. They still remembered the hopeful view they had had of the line of the Road ahead, and they still knew in which direction it lay. In any case, they now had so great a dislike for that hollow place about the stone that no thought of remaining there was in their minds. They packed up as quickly as their chilled fingers would work. Soon they were leading their ponies in single file over the rim and down the long northward slope of the hill, down into a foggy sea. As they went down the mist became colder and damper, and their hair hung lank and dripping on their foreheads. When they reached the bottom it was so chill that they halted and got out cloaks and hoods, which soon became bedewed with grey drops. Then, mounting their ponies, they went slowly on again, feeling their way by the rise and fall of the ground. They were steering, as well as they could guess, for the gate-like opening at the far northward end of the long valley which they had seen in the morning.

Once they were through the gap, they had only to keep on in anything like a straight line and they were bound in the end to strike the Road. Their thoughts did not go beyond that, except for a vague hope that perhaps away beyond the Downs there might be no fog.

Their going was very slow. To prevent their getting separated and wandering in different directions they went in file, with Frodo leading. Sam was behind him, and after him came Pippin, and then Merry. The valley seemed to stretch on endlessly. Suddenly Frodo saw a hopeful sign. On either side ahead a darkness began to loom through the mist; and he guessed that they were at last approaching the gap in the hills, the north-gate of the Barrow-downs. If they could pass that, they would be free.

'Come on! Follow me!' he called back over his shoulder, and he hurried forward. But his hope soon changed to bewilderment and alarm. The dark patches grew darker, but they shrank; and suddenly he saw, towering ominous before him and leaning slightly towards one another like the pillars of a headless door, two huge standing stones. He could not remember having seen any sign of these in the valley, when he looked out from the hill in the morning. He had passed between them almost before he was aware: and even as he did so darkness seemed to fall round him. His pony reared and snorted, and he fell off. When he looked back he found that he was alone: the others had not followed him.

'Sam!' he called. 'Pippin! Merry! Come along! Why don't you keep up?'

There was no answer. Fear took him, and he ran back past the stones, shouting wildly: 'Sam! Sam! Merry! Pippin!' The pony bolted into the mist and vanished. From some way off, or so it seemed, he thought he heard a cry: 'Hoy! Frodo! Hoy!' It was away eastward, on his left as he stood under the great stones, staring and straining into the gloom. He plunged off in the direction of the call, and found himself going steeply uphill.

As he struggled on he called again, and kept on calling more and more frantically; but he heard no answer for some time, and then it seemed faint and far ahead and high above him. 'Frodo! Hoy!' came the thin voices out of the mist; and then a cry that sounded like help, help! often repeated, ending with a last help! that trailed off into a long wail suddenly cut short. He stumbled forward with all the speed he could towards the cries; but the light was now gone, and clinging night had closed about him, so that it was impossible to be sure of any direction. He seemed all the time to be climbing up and up.

Only the change in the level of the ground at his feet told him when he at last came to the top of a ridge or hill. He was weary, sweating and yet chilled. It was wholly dark.

'Where are you?' he cried out miserably.

There was no reply. He stood listening. He was suddenly aware that it was getting very cold, and that up here a wind was beginning to blow, an icy wind. A change was coming in the weather. The mist was flowing past him now in shreds and tatters. His breath was smoking, and the darkness was less near and thick. He looked up and saw with surprise that faint stars were appearing overhead amid the strands of hurrying cloud and fog. The wind began to hiss over the grass.

He imagined suddenly that he caught a muffled cry, and he made towards it; and even as he went forward the mist was rolled up and thrust aside, and the starry sky was unveiled. A glance showed him that he was now facing southwards and was on a round hill-top, which he must have climbed from the north. Out of the east the biting wind was blowing. To his right there loomed against the westward stars a dark black shape. A great barrow stood there.

'Where are you?' he cried again, both angry and afraid.

'Here!' said a voice, deep and cold, that seemed to come out of the ground. 'I am waiting for you!'

'No!' said Frodo; but he did not run away. His knees gave, and he fell on the ground. Nothing happened, and there was no sound. Trembling he looked up, in time to see a tall dark figure like a shadow against the stars. It leaned over him. He thought there were two eyes, very cold though lit with a pale light that seemed to come from some remote distance. Then a grip stronger and colder than iron seized him. The icy touch froze his bones, and he remembered no more.

When he came to himself again, for a moment he could recall nothing except a sense of dread. Then suddenly he knew that he was imprisoned, caught hopelessly; he was in a barrow. A Barrow-wight had taken him, and he was probably already under the dreadful spells of the Barrow-wights about which whispered tales spoke. He dared not move, but lay as he found himself: flat on his back upon a cold stone with his hands on his breast.

But though his fear was so great that it seemed to be part of the very darkness that was round him, he found himself as he lay thinking about Bilbo Baggins and his stories, of their jogging along together in the lanes of the Shire and talking about roads and adventures. There is a seed of courage hidden (often deeply, it is true) in the heart of the fattest and most timid hobbit, waiting for some final and desperate danger to make it grow. Frodo was neither very fat nor very timid; indeed, though he did not know it, Bilbo (and Gandalf) had thought him the best hobbit in the Shire. He thought he had come to the end of his adventure, and a terrible end, but the thought hardened him. He found himself stiffening, as if for a final spring; he no longer felt limp like a helpless prey.

As he lay there, thinking and getting a hold of himself, he noticed all at once that the darkness was slowly giving way: a pale greenish light was growing round him. It did not at first show him what kind of a place he was in, for the light seemed to be coming out of himself, and from the floor beside him, and had not yet reached the roof or wall. He turned, and there in the cold glow he saw lying beside him Sam, Pippin, and Merry. They were on their backs, and their faces looked deathly pale; and they were clad in white. About them lay many treasures, of gold maybe, though in that light they looked cold and unlovely. On their heads were circlets, gold chains were about their waists, and on their fingers were many rings. Swords lay by their sides, and shields were at their feet. But across their three necks lay one long naked sword.

Suddenly a song began: a cold murmur, rising and falling. The voice seemed far away and immeasurably dreary, sometimes high in the air and thin, sometimes like a low moan from the ground. Out of the formless stream of sad but horrible sounds, strings of words would now and again shape themselves: grim, hard, cold words, heartless and miserable. The night was railing against the morning of which it was bereaved, and the cold was cursing the warmth for which it hungered. Frodo was chilled to the marrow. After a while the song became clearer, and with dread in his heart he perceived that it had changed into an incantation:

          Cold be hand and heart and bone,
          and cold be sleep under stone:
          never mare to wake on stony bed,
          never, till the Sun fails and the Moon is dead.
          In the black wind the stars shall die,
          and still on gold here let them lie,
          till the dark lord lifts his hand
          over dead sea and withered land.

He heard behind his head a creaking and scraping sound. Raising himself on one arm he looked, and saw now in the pale light that they were in a kind of passage which behind them turned a corner. Round the corner a long arm was groping, walking on its fingers towards Sam, who was lying nearest, and towards the hilt of the sword that lay upon him.

At first Frodo felt as if he had indeed been turned into stone by the incantation. Then a wild thought of escape came to him. He wondered if he put on the Ring, whether the Barrow-wight would miss him, and he might find some way out. He thought of himself running free over the grass, grieving for Merry, and Sam, and Pippin, but free and alive himself. Gandalf would admit that there had been nothing else he could do.

But the courage that had been awakened in him was now too strong: he could not leave his friends so easily. He wavered, groping in his pocket, and then fought with himself again; and as he did so the arm crept nearer. Suddenly resolve hardened in him, and he seized a short sword that lay beside him, and kneeling he stooped low over the bodies of his companions. With what strength he had he hewed at the crawling arm near the wrist, and the hand broke off; but at the same moment the sword splintered up to the hilt. There was a shriek and the light vanished. In the dark there was a snarling noise.

Frodo fell forward over Merry, and Merry's face felt cold. All at once back into his mind, from which it had disappeared with the first coming of the fog, came the memory of the house down under the Hill, and of Tom singing. He remembered the rhyme that Tom had taught them. In a small desperate voice he began: and through the silence of the night he heard his voice thin and quavering but unbroken, rising out of the cold dark and into the answering dark above:

          Ho! Tom Bombadil, Tom Bombadillo!
           By water, wood and hill, by the reed and willow,
           By fire, sun and moon, harken now and hear us!
           Come, Tom Bombadil, for our need is near us!

There The hobbits wake up in a foggy island, feeling trapped and cold. They decide to leave the area and head towards the gate-like opening at the far northward end of the long valley. As they continue, Frodo sees two huge standing stones and passes between them, only to find himself alone and separated from the others. He hears their cries for help and tries to find them, but the darkness and fog make it difficult. Eventually, Frodo and the others are captured by a Barrow-wight and imprisoned in a barrow. Frodo manages to call for Tom Bombadil's help, who rescues them and brings them out into the sunlight. Tom also retrieves their ponies and provides them with new clothes and weapons. The hobbits then continue on their journey, armed with their new weapons and accompanied by Tom Bombadil. Frodo and his companions, guided by Tom Bombadil, journeyed steadily towards the Road, eventually reaching the village of Bree. They found the village gate closed, but the gatekeeper allowed them to enter after questioning them. They made their way to The Prancing Pony, an inn recommended by Tom Bombadil, where they hoped to find a place to stay for the night. The inn was bustling with various folk, including men of Bree, local hobbits, dwarves, and other mysterious figures. The Shire-hobbits were welcomed by the Bree-landers, and the landlord, Barliman Butterbur, introduced them to the crowd. The Bree-hobbits were friendly and inquisitive, and Frodo soon found that he had to give an explanation for his presence. He claimed to be interested in history and geography and was thinking of writing a book about hobbits living outside the Shire. This sparked a chorus of voices offering information and suggestions for sources. However, Frodo became uneasy when a Bree-lander asked about the Underhills and their relations. He also noticed a strange man named Strider listening intently to the hobbit-talk. Strider later warned Frodo to stop his friends from talking too much, as there were queer folk about. Frodo accidentally used the Ring and vanished during a song, causing a commotion in the inn. Strider then requested a private talk with Frodo, offering information and advice in exchange for being taken along on their journey. Strider warns Frodo that his "accident" has made his position dangerous and that there are untrustworthy people in Bree, like Bill Ferny, who might sell information about him. Strider offers to guide Frodo and his friends, but they are hesitant to trust him. Mr. Butterbur arrives with a letter from Gandalf, which reveals that Strider is indeed a friend and ally. The letter also warns Frodo to leave the Shire as soon as possible and to make for Rivendell. Strider agrees to guide them and plans to take them to Weathertop, a hill with a wide view, where they might meet up with Gandalf. However, Strider is troubled by Gandalf's absence and fears that the Black Riders may be involved. Strider and the hobbits prepare to leave Bree, but find that their ponies have vanished. They are forced to buy a poor, underfed pony from Bill Ferny, and set off on their journey. Strider decides to take a winding route through the woods to throw off any pursuers. Despite the troubling events of the previous night, the hobbits find walking through the woods to be pleasant and peaceful. Strider, Frodo, and Merry explore the top of Weathertop, finding a wide ring of ancient stonework and a cairn of broken stones blackened as if with fire. Strider believes Gandalf may have been there recently and left a sign, but they cannot be sure. They realize they are being watched by Black Riders, and Strider decides they must stay hidden in the dell for the night, using fire as their defense. The group is concerned about their dwindling food supply, as they still have a long journey ahead of them. As night falls, Strider tells the group tales of the old days to keep their minds off their fear. Frodo's wound begins to grow painful, and Strider does his best to heal it with a plant called Athelas. They decide to leave Weathertop and head in a southerly direction, crossing the Road and making their way through the wild, pathless land. Over the next few days, they trudge along in silence, with Frodo's pain increasing but no sign of the Black Riders. They keep watch at night, fearing an ambush, but see nothing. On the sixth day, they reach the top of a long slope and see a huddle of wooded hills ahead. In the thin sunshine, the river gleamed pale, and in the distance, another river appeared in a misty, stony valley. Strider informed the group that they had reached the River Hoarwell and must return to the Road for a while. The next day, they found the Last Bridge unguarded and crossed it safely, continuing on through a somber country of dark trees and sullen hills. As they ventured further, they discovered an old troll-hole and a path leading through the woods. Following the path, they came across three large stone trolls, which reminded Frodo of Bilbo's first adventure. They rested and shared a meal, with Sam singing a song about trolls. Continuing on, they eventually reached the Road again and heard the sound of hoofs approaching. Though initially fearful, Strider recognized the sound as friendly, and the group's spirits lifted. As the bells jingled and the white horse approached, Strider dashed towards the road. The rider, Glorfindel, revealed that he was sent from Rivendell to look for Frodo and his friends, as they were in danger. He explained that Gandalf had not yet reached Rivendell, and that Elrond had sent out riders to find them. Glorfindel urged them to continue their journey without rest, as the Nine were pursuing them. Frodo reluctantly agreed to ride Glorfindel's horse, and they continued on their way. As they neared the Ford of Rivendell, they were ambushed by the Black Riders. Frodo managed to cross the Ford, but the Riders were swept away by a sudden surge of water. Frodo then awoke in the House of Elrond, where Gandalf informed him that he had been close to succumbing to his wound. Gandalf also revealed that he had been held captive and that war was preparing. Frodo discovers that his arm is healing quickly thanks to Elrond's care, and Gandalf explains that he had been carrying a splinter from the Morgul-knife in his wound for seventeen days. Gandalf tells Frodo that if the Riders had succeeded in piercing his heart, he would have become a wraith under the Dark Lord's control. Later, Frodo meets Glóin, one of the twelve companions of Thorin Oakenshield, and learns about the current state of the Dwarf-kingdom and its people. Frodo and Bilbo discuss the changes in the Desolation of Smaug and the beauty of Rivendell, before attending a feast in their honor. After the feast, they listen to elvish songs and tales in the Hall of Fire, where Frodo is reunited with Bilbo. They talk about their adventures and the Shire, and Bilbo recites a song he composed with Aragorn's help. Later, they enjoy a quiet conversation in Bilbo's room, reminiscing about the beautiful things they've seen in the world. The next day, Frodo feels refreshed and ready for the Council of Elrond, where important decisions will be made. Gandalf calls Frodo and Bilbo to the Council of Elrond, where they meet various characters, including Gimli, Legolas, and Boromir. Elrond speaks of Sauron and the Rings of Power, and the history of the world. He reveals that the One Ring has been found, and they must decide what to do with it. Boromir shares his dream, which led him to seek counsel in Rivendell, and Aragorn presents the broken sword, Narsil. Frodo reluctantly reveals the Ring, and they discuss the fate of Minas Tirith and the role of the Ring in the world's peril. The Sword of Elendil, broken and treasured by his heirs, is said to be reforged when the Ring, Isildur's Bane, is found. Boromir seeks the meaning of a riddle and hopes the sword can help Gondor. Bilbo recites a poem about the sword's renewal and Aragorn, heir of Isildur, speaks of his lineage and the role of the Rangers in protecting the North. Gandalf reveals that he discovered the true nature of the Ring in Gondor and that Gollum had possessed it for many years. He also shares the dark words inscribed on the Ring, confirming its identity as the One Ring. However, Legolas brings ill news that Gollum has escaped from the Elves of Mirkwood, causing concern among the company. In Rohan, Gandalf finds evil already at work and the king unwilling to listen to his warnings. He takes a horse, Shadowfax, and rides to the Shire, where he learns that the Riders have invaded. He reaches Hobbiton just after Frodo has left, and continues to follow the Riders, eventually coming to Buckland and finding Crickhollow broken open and empty. Gandalf's fear grows as he continues his pursuit, but he remains determined to protect Frodo and the others from the growing threat of Sauron and Saruman. Gandalf recounts his journey to Bree, where he learned that Frodo had left with Strider. He then followed the Riders and was besieged on Weathertop, eventually escaping and making his way to Rivendell. The Council discusses the possibility of enlisting Tom Bombadil's help, but Gandalf believes he would not understand the need and would be an unsafe guardian. They ultimately decide that the Ring must be sent to the Fire in Mordor. Frodo, feeling a great dread, volunteers to take the Ring, though he does not know the way. Elrond believes this task is appointed for Frodo and that if he does not find a way, no one will. Sam insists on accompanying Frodo on his journey. In Rivendell, the hobbits discuss their desire to accompany Frodo on his journey. Elrond decides that the Company of the Ring shall be nine, including Gandalf, Legolas, Gimli, Aragorn, and Boromir. Despite Elrond's initial reluctance, Merry and Pippin are also allowed to join, leaving only two spots left. Bilbo gives Frodo his sword, Sting, and a mithril shirt for protection. The Company prepares to depart, wearing warm clothes and carrying weapons, with their supplies loaded on a pony. They await Gandalf's arrival before setting out on their journey. an agreement without any words being spoken. They heard eerie noises in the wind, and saw strange clouds and flocks of birds flying overhead. Gandalf and Aragorn debated whether to continue on their current path or take a darker, secret way. They decided to face the weather and the high pass, despite the potential dangers. As they climbed the steep and difficult road, the weather worsened, with snow falling heavily and filling the air. The Company struggled to continue, and Gandalf wondered if the snowstorm was a contrivance of the Enemy. The Company, unable to continue through the night due to eerie noises and falling stones, huddle together for warmth and protection. Gandalf shares a precious cordial with them to revive their spirits, and they discuss their options for continuing their journey. They decide to attempt the Mines of Moria, despite the fear and dread associated with the name. Aragorn warns Gandalf to beware if he passes the doors of Moria, but ultimately agrees to follow his lead. The group decides to sleep on the decision before taking a vote, but the howling of wolves in the night convinces them to set out for Moria as soon as daylight comes. The Company, including Gandalf, Aragorn, Legolas, Gimli, and the hobbits, climb to the top of a hill to defend themselves from the howling wolves that surround them. Gandalf confronts a large wolf, and with the help of Legolas' arrow, they drive the hunting packs away. They continue their journey, eventually reaching the Walls of Moria. Gandalf searches for the hidden doors while the others prepare to enter the Mines, knowing they must leave their pony Bill behind. As night falls, Gandalf struggles to recall the password to open the doors, but remains determined to find the opening words. Gandalf leads the Company through the Mines of Moria, using his staff to light the way. They encounter many dangers, including pitfalls and chasms, and Frodo begins to hear the faint sound of footsteps following them. They eventually reach a large, empty hall with three entrances, and Gandalf decides they should rest there for the night. The Company huddles together in a corner to escape the cold air, feeling oppressed by the vastness and loneliness of the Mines. In Moria, the Company discovers the tomb of Balin, a dwarf and friend of Bilbo. Gandalf finds a book, the Book of Mazarbul, which details the failed attempt to retake Moria by Balin's folk. As they prepare to leave, they are attacked by orcs and a cave-troll. The Company fiercely defends themselves, managing to drive the orcs away. Gandalf urges them to leave quickly before the troll returns, but as they retreat, a huge orc-chieftain and his followers block their way. The Company faces a great orc with a spear, who injures Frodo before being killed by Aragorn. Gandalf orders them to run, and they make their way through the dark passage, pursued by drum-beats and orcs. They reach a hall with a fiery chasm and a narrow bridge, where they encounter a terrifying Balrog. Gandalf stands against the Balrog, allowing the others to escape, but is dragged into the abyss by its whip. The Company, now without Gandalf, continues their journey, passing the Mirrormere and Durin's Stone. The Company, led by Aragorn, continues their journey southwards, coming across a deep well of water and the woods of Lothlórien. Legolas speaks of the beauty of Lothlórien and its golden trees, and Aragorn urges them to hasten. Frodo and Sam struggle to keep up due to their injuries, but Aragorn eventually tends to their wounds. They decide to rest in the tree-tops for the night, and Legolas climbs up a tree with Frodo and Sam. They meet Haldir, an Elf who speaks the Common Language, and his brothers Rúmil and Orophin. Haldir welcomes them and mentions that they have heard rumors of the Company's coming. The Company, guided by Haldir and Rúmil, crossed the Silverlode river into the Naith of Lórien. Gimli, being a dwarf, was initially required to be blindfolded, but Aragorn insisted that the entire Company be blindfolded to be fair. They continued their journey, and upon reaching Cerin Amroth, they were allowed to remove their blindfolds. Frodo was amazed by the beauty of the land, feeling as if he had stepped into a vanished world. Haldir explained that they were feeling the power of the Lady of the Galadhrim, and invited them to climb up Cerin Amroth with him. The Company entered the circle of white trees and climbed to the high flet, where they met Lord Celeborn and Lady Galadriel. They were welcomed and offered refuge in the City of the Trees, Caras Galadhon. The companions spoke of Gandalf's fall and their journey through Moria, and the Elves lamented his loss in their songs. They spent several days in Lothlórien, resting and walking among the trees. During this time, Legolas and Gimli grew closer, and Frodo composed a song in memory of Gandalf. One evening, Frodo and Sam discuss their thoughts on Elves and their time in Lothlórien. They express their desire to see the Lady of the Elves again, and as if in response, Lady Galadriel appears and leads them to the Mirror of Galadriel. Sam and Frodo each look into the Mirror, seeing visions of their homes and other mysterious scenes. Afterward, Galadriel reveals that she is the keeper of one of the Three Rings, Nenya, the Ring of Adamant. The Company is later summoned to the chamber of Celeborn, where they discuss their departure and the path they should take. Celeborn offers to provide them with boats to travel down the Great River Anduin, delaying the decision of their course for a few more days. In Lothlórien, the Company prepares to leave and is given gifts by the Elves. Aragorn receives a sheath for his sword, Boromir a belt of gold, Merry and Pippin silver belts, Legolas a bow and arrows, Sam a box of earth from Galadriel's orchard, and Gimli three strands of Galadriel's golden hair. Frodo is given a small crystal phial containing the light of Eärendil's star, which will shine brighter when night is around him. The Company then departs in boats provided by the Elves, with Haldir as their guide. Frodo and the Company continue their journey down the Great River Anduin, feeling increasingly insecure and exposed in their small boats. They pass through the desolate Brown Lands and the grassy plains of Rohan, and Frodo recalls the beauty of Lothlórien. Sam keeps watch one night and sees Gollum, a creature with pale, lamplike eyes, following them on a floating log. Aragorn is aware of Gollum's presence and tries to catch him, but the creature is too elusive. They continue to travel mostly by night, hoping to lose Gollum, but remain wary of his potential threat. As they approach the hill-country of the Emyn Muil, Aragorn spots a hunting eagle in the sky, wondering what it forebodes. lake, fenced by steep grey hills whose sides were clad with trees, but their heads were bare, cold-gleaming in the sunlight. The travellers, having journeyed by water and faced many dangers, finally reached the Argonath, the Pillars of the Kings. As they passed through the dark chasm of the Gates, Aragorn revealed himself as Elessar, the Elfstone son of Arathorn, heir of Elendil, and expressed his longing for Minas Anor and his own city. The boats then shot out into a wide clear light, and the pent waters spread out into a long oval lake, surrounded by steep grey hills. The Company reaches the lake Nen Hithoel, surrounded by steep grey hills and three peaks at the southern end. Aragorn identifies the peaks as Amon Lhaw, Amon Hen, and Tol Brandir. They rest and eat before continuing their journey, eventually reaching the green lawn of Parth Galen under the shadow of Tol Brandir. They set up camp and discuss their next move, with Frodo feeling the burden of the Ring and the decision of where to go. Boromir tries to persuade Frodo to come to Minas Tirith and give him the Ring, but Frodo refuses. Boromir becomes aggressive, and Frodo puts on the Ring to escape him. Frodo reaches the summit of Amon Hen and sees visions of war and destruction across Middle-earth. He takes off the Ring and decides to leave the Company, fearing the Ring's influence on them. Aragorn believes that Frodo is debating which course is the most desperate, as it is now more hopeless than ever for the Company to go east. The group discusses their options and ultimately decides to split up, with some going to Minas Tirith and others following Frodo. However, when Frodo tries to leave secretly with a boat, Sam catches him and insists on joining him. They set off together on the last stage of the Quest, while the rest of the Company is left to find their own way, hoping that Strider will look after them. Frodo is frustrated with Sam for insisting on coming with him on his journey to Mordor, but ultimately, he is glad for the company. They set off together in a boat, paddling down the river and eventually reaching the southern slopes of Amon Lhaw. They hide their boat and continue on foot, seeking a path that will lead them to the Land of Shadow. This marks the end of the first part of the history of the War of the Ring, with the second part titled "The Two Towers" and the third part titled "The Return of the King."                                              
(.venv) dhcp-10-29-45-156:document_summarizer patricktimons$ 